Mumu
In one of the remote streets of Moscow, in a gray house with white columns, a mezzanine and a crooked balcony, once lived a lady, a widow, surrounded by numerous servants. Her sons served in St. Petersburg, her daughters married; she rarely traveled and lived out the last years of her stingy and bored old age in seclusion. Her day, joyless and stormy, had long passed; but her evening was blacker than night.
Of all her servants, the most remarkable person was the janitor Gerasim, a man of twelve inches tall, built like a hero and deaf-mute from birth. The lady took him from the village, where he lived alone, in a small hut, apart from his brothers, and was considered almost the most serviceable draft peasant. Gifted with extraordinary strength, he worked for four — the matter was argued in his hands, and it was fun to look at him when he either plowed and, leaning with huge palms on the plow, it seemed that alone, without the help of a horse, he cut the elastic chest of the earth, or on Petrov's day he acted so crushingly with a scythe that even a young to sweep the birch forest from the roots down, or to swiftly and non-stop threshed with a three-pronged flail, and as a lever the oblong and hard muscles of his shoulders descended and rose. The constant silence gave a solemn importance to his frantic work. He was a nice man, and if it hadn't been for his misfortune, any girl would have willingly married him... But they brought Gerasim to Moscow, bought him boots, sewed a caftan for the summer, a sheepskin coat for the winter, gave him a broom and a shovel in his hands and identified him as a janitor.
He did not like his new life very much at first. Since childhood, he got used to field work, to rural life. Alienated by his misfortune from the community of people, he grew mute and mighty, like a tree growing on a fertile land... Resettled in the city, he did not understand what was happening to him — he was bored and perplexed, as a young, healthy bull, who had just been taken from a field where juicy grass grew up to his belly, was taken, put on a railway carriage — and now, dousing his fat body with smoke from with sparks, then with wavy steam, they are rushing him now, rushing with a bang and a squeal, and God knows where they are rushing to! Gerasim's occupation in his new position seemed to him a joke after the hard peasant work; in half an hour everything was ready for him, and again he would stop in the middle of the yard and stare open-mouthed at everyone passing by, as if wanting to get them to solve his mysterious situation, then suddenly he would go somewhere into a corner and, throwing his broom and shovel far away, throw himself face down on the ground and lie for hours motionless on his chest, like a trapped animal. But a person gets used to everything, and Gerasim finally got used to city life. He didn't have much to do; his whole duty was to keep the yard clean, to bring a barrel of water twice a day, to train and chop firewood for the kitchen and house, but not to let strangers in and to guard at night. And I must say, he diligently fulfilled his duty: he never had a puppy lying around in his yard, or litter; whether a broken nag-water wagon given under his command would get stuck somewhere with a barrel in a dirty time, he would only move his shoulder - and not only the cart, but the horse itself would push off; whether there was firewood when he starts stabbing, his axe rings like glass, and splinters and logs fly in all directions; and what about strangers, so after he caught two thieves one night, knocked them against each other with their foreheads, so much so that even if you don't take them to the police later, everyone in the neighborhood began to respect him very much; even those who passed by during the day were no longer scammers, but just strangers with at the sight of the formidable janitor, they waved and shouted at him, as if he could hear their screams. With the rest of the servants, Gerasim was in a relationship not that friendly — they were afraid of him — but short: he considered them to be his own. They explained themselves to him by signs, and he understood them, followed all orders exactly, but he also knew his rights, and no one dared to sit in his place at the table. In general, Gerasim was of a strict and serious disposition, loved order in everything; even the roosters did not dare to fight with him, otherwise it would be a disaster! He sees it, immediately grabs his legs, turns the wheel ten times in the air and throws it apart. There were geese in the lady's yard, too; but the goose is known to be an important and sensible bird; Gerasim felt respect for them, followed them and fed them; he himself looked like a sedate gander. They gave him a cubbyhole over the kitchen; he arranged it for himself, according to his taste, built in it a bed of oak planks on four blocks — a truly heroic bed; a hundred pounds could be put on it — it would not bend; there was a hefty chest under the bed; in the corner there was a table of the same strong quality, and near the table there was a chair on three legs, but so sturdy and squat that Gerasim himself used to pick it up, drop it and grin. The closet was locked with a lock that resembled a roll in its appearance, only black; Gerasim always carried the key to this lock on his belt. He didn't like to be visited.
So a year passed, at the end of which a small incident happened to Gerasim.
The old lady, with whom he lived in the janitors, followed ancient customs in everything and kept numerous servants; in her house there were not only laundresses, seamstresses, carpenters, tailors and dressmakers, there was even one saddler, he was also considered a veterinary doctor and a doctor for people, there was a home doctor for the mistress, there was Finally, a shoemaker named Kapiton Klimov, a drunkard Gorky. Klimov considered himself to be an offended and unappreciated being, an educated and metropolitan man who would not live in Moscow, without a job, in some backwater, and if he drank, as he himself expressed himself with deliberation and knocking on his chest, then he was already drinking out of grief. One day the lady and her head butler, Gavrila, came to talk about him, a man who, judging by his yellow eyes and duck nose alone, fate itself seemed to have determined to be a commanding person. The lady regretted the spoiled morality of Kapiton, who had just been found somewhere on the street the day before.
—And what, Gavrila," she suddenly began, "do you think we should marry him off?" Maybe he'll settle down.
— Why not marry, sir! It is possible, sir," Gavrila replied, "and it will be very good, sir."
— Yes; but who will marry him?
— Of course, sir. However, as you please, sir. Still, he may be needed for something, so to speak; you can't throw him out of a dozen.
— It seems that he likes Tatiana?
Gavrila wanted to object something, but compressed his lips.
- yes!.. let him woo Tatiana," the lady decided, sniffing tobacco with pleasure, "do you hear?
—I'm listening, sir," Gavrila said and left.
Returning to his room (it was in the wing and was almost completely cluttered with wrought-iron chests), Gavrila first sent his wife out, and then sat down by the window and thought. The unexpected order of the lady apparently puzzled him. At last he got up and ordered Kapiton to be called. Kapiton appeared... But before we pass on their conversation to the readers, we consider it useful to tell in a few words who this Tatiana was, whom Kapiton had to marry, and why the lady's command confused the butler.
